The Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies, informally known as the "Ziegler School" or simply "Ziegler", is the graduate program of study leading to ordination as a Conservative rabbi at the American Jewish University (formerly known as the University of Judaism).
Founded in 1996, it was the first independent rabbinical school located on the U.S. West Coast. It ordained its first class in 1999.
Located in Los Angeles, it has ordained more than 200 rabbis; about half of them women. The school attracts an international student body, with students from Australia, Brazil, Canada, France, Israel, Mexico, Uganda, and the United Kingdom, as well as from every region of the United States. Upon ordination, Ziegler rabbis serve in every sector of the United States and Israel. Ziegler rabbis are automatically admitted to the international Rabbinical Assembly.
The Ziegler School program requires students to participate in a year abroad in Israel.
The Ziegler School ordained only two students in 2021. In 2022, it slashed tuition by 80%, with the stated goal to attract more students and make rabbinical school more accessible.. In 2023, after AJU sold off their campus in Bel Air, the Ziegler School relocated to an office building in Pico-Robertson.
In March 2024, the Jewish Telegraphic Agency revealed that AJU had hired law firm Cozen O'Connor to investigate complaints of gender-based misconduct at the Ziegler School. The complaints, made over the previous two decades by former rabbinical students, allege a pattern of male favoritism and disrespectful treatment by dean Rabbi Bradley Shavit Artson and deputy dean Rabbi Cheryl Peretz, who were notified of the investigation by a Cozen O'Connor attorney. Artson and Peretz are also the subject of a probe by the Rabbinical Assembly over a similar set of allegations. According to the JTA's article, a report from AJU is forthcoming.


== Notable people ==
Faculty:
Aryeh Cohen
Elliot N. Dorff
Ziony Zevit
Alumni:
Natasha Mann
Danya Ruttenberg
Gershom Sizomu
Julie Platt (board member)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website