David-Seth Kirshner (born 1973), is the Rabbi of Temple Emanu-El, in Closter, New Jersey.
Prior to becoming a congregational rabbi, he worked at the Jewish Theological Seminary, which he joined in 1999, serving as Senior Director of Institutional Advancement, overseeing the Seminary's development and outreach efforts. For five years, Kirshner also served as spiritual leader for the Hebrew Congregation of Fitzgerald, in Southern Georgia.
Rabbi Kirshner holds the following positions of leadership:

President of the (2012–14) New York Board of Rabbis
President of the (2017–19) New Jersey Board of Rabbis
Appointed to NJ Israel Commission by Governor Chris Christie (2012. Re-appointed (2x) by Governor Phil Murphy
Member of the Chancellor’s Rabbinic Cabinet at the Jewish Theological Seminary
Kellogg School of Rabbinic Management at Northwestern University, Inaugural class
UJC Rabbinic Cabinet
Former Board member of the Solomon Schechter Day School of Bergen County
Former Board Member of the Leffell School (Westchester)
National Council of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC)
Hartman Fellow in Jerusalem
Executive Officer of the Jewish Federations of North America (JFNA)

He has written articles and been featured in many media sources and is regularly published in the Jewish Standard, The Times of Israel,  The Bergen Record and The New York Times.
Rabbi Kirshner is the author of Streams of Shattered Consciousness: A Chronicle of the First 50 Days of the Israel - Hamas War. Published by Xlibris on December 21, 2023, by January 6, 2024 it had sold 7,000 copies. http://www.streamsshattered.com
Rabbi Kirshner holds a BA degree from York University in Toronto, Canada and earned an MA in Hebrew Letters and Rabbinic Ordination from the Jewish Theological Seminary of America. Rabbi Kirshner is married to 'Dori Frumin Kirshner.


== References ==


== External links ==
If you voted for Hamas, Israel has a right to kill you, says president of NY Board of Rabbis (Mondoweiss, July 29, 2014).